Captioning sponsored by
MacNEIL/LEHRER PRODUCTIONS
>> Sreenivasan: THE STOCK MARKET
CLOSED WITH ANOTHER RECORD HIGH
THIS NEW YEAR'S EVE, ENDING A
BLOCKBUSTER 2013 MARKED BY HUGE
GAINS.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
GWEN IFILL AND JUDY WOODRUFF ARE
BOTH ON HOLIDAY.
ALSO AHEAD, SYRIA MISSES A KEY
DEADLINE TO ABANDON PART OF ITS
DEADLY CHEMICAL ARSENAL.
WE UPDATE THE INTERNATIONAL PUSH
TO DESTROY THE TOXIC STOCKPILE.
PLUS, WE CLOSE WITH A
CONVERSATION ON A POET FROM
MEDIEVAL PERSIA WHOSE VERSE HAS
STOOD THE TEST OF TIME, STILL
POPULAR IN MODERN IRAN.
IN MORE.
>> TURKEY IS -- HE IS LIKE
SHAKESPEARE AND OTHER HE ALL
ROLLINGED INTO ONE
>> Sreenivasan: THOSE ARE JUST
SOME OF THE STORIES WE'RE
COVERING ON TONIGHT'S PBS
NEWSHOUR.
>> Sreenivasan: ON WALL STREET
TODAY, THE END OF 2013 WENT MUCH
LIKE THE REST OF THIS RECORD-
SETTING YEAR: STOCKS KEPT
RISING.
THE S&P 500 HAD ITS BEST YEAR
SINCE 1997, UP 29%.
OTHER MAJOR INDEXES ALSO SCORED
BIG.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
ADDED ANOTHER 72 POINTS TODAY TO
CLOSE AT 16,576.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 22 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 4,176.
WE'LL LOOK AT WHAT DROVE THE
YEAR-LONG RALLY RIGHT AFTER THE
NEWS SUMMARY.
TWO NEW REPORTS ROUNDED OUT THE
YEAR IN ECONOMIC NEWS.
HOUSING PRICES ROSE AGAIN IN
OCTOBER FOR A YEAR-TO-YEAR GAIN
OF 13.6%, THE MOST SINCE 2006.
THAT'S ACCORDING TO THE STANDARD
AND POOR'S/CASE-SHILLER INDEX.
AND THE BUSINESS RESEARCH GROUP
CONFERENCE BOARD REPORTED
THAT CONSUMERS' MOODS BRIGHTENED
FOR HIRING AND GROWTH.
IT HAD BEEN DOWN FOR THREE
STRAIGHT MONTHS.
THE NUMBER OF ENROLLMENTS IN THE
NEW HEALTH CARE LAW HAS TOPPED
TWO MILLION.
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
ANNOUNCED THE FIGURE TODAY.
IT'S BASED ON NUMBERS FROM THE
FEDERAL WEB SITE healthcare.gov
COVERING 36 STATES PLUS
INDIVIDUAL WEB SITES SERVING THE
OTHER 14 STATES.
THE ADMINISTRATION INITIALLY
HOPED TO HAVE 3.3 MILLION
ENROLLMENTS BY NOW.
IT'S ALREADY 2014 IN SOME PARTS
OF THE WORLD, WITH MILLIONS OF
REVELERS WELCOMING THE NEW YEAR
WITH CELEBRATIONS AND FUTURISTIC
FIREWORKS.
WE HAVE A REPORT FROM NEIL
CONNERY OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS.
( CHEERS AND APPLAUSE )
>> Reporter: AUCKLAND WAS THE
FIRST MAJOR CITY TO RING IN THE
NEW YEAR AS NEW ZEALAND WELCOMED
2014 IN STYLE.
( CHEERS AND APPLAUSE )
IN SYDNEY, THERE WAS A
BREATHTAKING START TO NEW YEAR.
MORE THAN ONE MILLION PEOPLE
CRAMMED ONTO THE SHORES OF
SYDNEY HARBOR AS THE CITY BATHED
UNDER THE GLOW OF A SPECTACULAR
11-MINUTE FIREWORK DISPLAY.
AUSTRALIA, AS ALWAYS, DETERMINED
TO SHOW THE WORLD HOW NEW YEAR
SHOULD REALLY BE CELEBRATED.
( CHEERS AND APPLAUSE )
IN TOKYO, MONKS RANG THE BELL OF
TIME HOUSED AT THE BUDDHIST
TEMPLE TO MARK 2014'S ARRIVAL.
THE ANCIENT TRADITIONS GREETED
BY A MODERN WELCOME WITH
EVERYONE DETERMINED TO GET A
PICTURE.
( CHEERS AND APPLAUSE )
MORE THAN 850,000 REVELERS IN
TAPEI SAVORED THIS SPECTACLE AS
TAWIAN MARKED THE MIDNIGHT HOUR.
QC A
( CHEERS AND APPLAUSE )
HONG KONG'S HARBOR PLAYED HOST
TO A MESMERIZING START TO THE
NEW YEAR.
( CHEERS AND APPLAUSE )REAT WALR
BEIJING WASIT U LP WITH LASERS,
PROVIDING THE DRAMATIC BACKDROP
FOR CELEBRATIONS AND THRILLING
THE CROWDS.
>> Sreenivasan: LATER, THE
PERSIAN GULF OIL CITY OF DUBAI
BOASTED THE NIGHT'S BIGGEST
FIREWORKS DISPLAY.
ORGANIZERS SAID IT SET A WORLD
RECORD.
THE SHOW USED HALF A MILLION
SHELLS AND LASTED SIX FULL
MINUTES, CENTERED ON THE WORLD'S
TALLEST TOWER AND SYNCHRONIZED
BY 100 COMPUTERS.
OFFICIALS OF THE GUINNESS WORLD
RECORD BOOK WITNESSED THE EVENT.
IN RUSSIA, PRESIDENT VLADIMIR
PUTIN VOWED TODAY THAT THOSE
BEHIND THE BOMBINGS IN VOLGOGRAD
WILL FACE "COMPLETE
ANNIHILATION."
THE ATTACKS SUNDAY AND MONDAY
KILLED AT LEAST 34 PEOPLE.
SECURITY WAS RAMPED UP TODAY
ACROSS THE CITY ONCE KNOWN AS
STALINGRAD.
POLICE DETAINED DOZENS OF
SUSPECTS, BUT IT WAS UNCLEAR IF
ANY OF THEM WERE TIED TO THE
BOMBINGS.
THE ATTACKS RAISED SECURITY
CONCERNS ABOUT THE WINTER
OLYMPICS, SET FOR FEBRUARY IN
SOCHI, SOME 400 MILES AWAY.
THE GOVERNMENT OF SOUTH SUDAN
AND REBELS HAVE AGREED TO ATTEND
PEACE TALKS IN ETHIOPIA, IN AN
EFFORT TO END THE FIGHTING
BETWEEN ETHNIC FACTIONS.
BUT HOURS BEFORE THE
ANNOUNCEMENT, THE REBELS TOOK
CONTROL OF NEARLY ALL OF THE
CITY OF BOR, IN JONGLEI STATE.
AT LEAST 1,000 PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
KILLED IN SOUTH SUDAN IN TWO
WEEKS OF FIGHTING.
EVACUATED RESIDENTS OF A SMALL
NORTH DAKOTA TOWN WERE ALLOWED
TO RETURN HOME TODAY, 24 HOURS
AFTER A MILE-LONG CRUDE OIL
TRAIN DERAILED.
THE TRAIN WENT OFF THE TRACKS ON
THE OUTSKIRTS OF CASSELTON.
IT TRIGGERED A THUNDEROUS
EXPLOSION THAT SENT A HUGE
FIREBALL AND THICK BLACK SMOKE
INTO THE SKY.
NO ONE WAS HURT, AND OFFICIALS
SAID TODAY THE AIR HAS CLEARED.
>> WE HAVE NOT DETECTED ANY OF
THE PRODUCTS OF COMBUSTION LIKE
CARBON MONOXIDE OR SULFUR
DIOXIDE OR NITROGEN DIOXIDE THAT
COULD COME FROM BURNING CRUDE
OIL IN THE COMMUNITY, SO WE'RE
REALLY ENCOURAGED BY THAT.
WE HAVEN'T DETECTED ANY OTHER
VOLATILE, ORGANIC COMPOUNDS.
>> Sreenivasan: A SPOKESWOMAN
FOR THE RAIL COMPANY SAID A
SEPARATE TRAIN TRANSPORTING
GRAIN DERAILED FIRST.
THAT, IN TURN, KNOCKED SEVERAL
OF THE OIL TRAIN'S CARS OFF
THEIR ADJOINING TRACKS.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
THE STOCK MARKET'S BLOCKBUSTER
YEAR; THE CHALLENGE OF
ELIMINATING SYRIA'S CHEMICAL
WEAPONS; THE BATTLE IN MAINE
OVER IMPORTING PRESCRIPTION
DRUGS; THE MAN WHO MOVED "OLE
MISS" AWAY FROM ITS SEGREGATED
PAST; RESTORING SIGHT TO PEOPLE
BLINDED BY CATARACTS IN RURAL
INDIA; PLUS, TRANSLATING 14th
CENTURY PERSIAN POETRY FOR THE
MODERN MASSES.
>> Sreenivasan: 2013 WAS A YEAR
OF HUGE GAINS ON THE STOCK
MARKET, WITH THE DOW JONES
INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE GAINING
ALMOST 26%, THE NASDAQ ABOUT
37%.
BUT WHAT ABOUT THE REST OF THE
ECONOMY?
JEFFREY BROWN RECORDED OUR END-
OF-THE-YEAR LOOK YESTERDAY.
>> WALL STREET WAS UP IN 2013,
WAY UP, BY ANY AND ALL MAJOR
MARKET MEASURES.
IN THE MEANTIME, THE OUTLOOK FOR
MAIN STREET, ECONOMIC GROWTH IN
JOBS WAS BETTER BUT HARDLY
GREAT.
WE DISCUSS WHAT IS GOING ON WITH
HUGH JOHNSON, A MARKET ANALYST
WHO RUNS HIS OWN INVESTMENT
MANAGEMENT FIRM, ROBIN FAZ ED
AND HARRY HOLTZER FROM
GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY AND
WELCOME TO AIL OF YOU.
HUGH JOHNSON, START US OFF.
HOW GOOD A YEAR WAS THIS FOR
STOCKS?
>> THERE'S NO WORD THAT I
THINK -- NO SUPERLATIVE THAT IS
STRONG ENOUGH TO REALLY DESCRIBE
HOW GOOD OF A YEAR IT WAS.
IT WAS NOT ONLY A GOOD YEAR.
IT'S ONE OF THE BETTER YEARS WE
HAVE HAD.
IF YOU GO BACK AND LOOK AT THE
RECORDS SINCE 1890 BUT I WOULD
SAY THE BIGGEST THING WAS IT WAS
A BIG SURPRISE.
I DON'T KNOW ANYBODY THAT HAD
BEEN FORECASTING, A LOT OF
PEOPLE FORECAST AND UP YEAR BUT
NOBODY FORECASTED ANYTHING OVER
12 TO 15 PERCENT SO A BIG YEAR
AND BIG SURPRISE.
>> ROBIN WAS IT A SURPRISE TO
YOU?
>> YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE TO TOAST
MR. BEN BERNANKE ON NEW YEAR'S
EVE BECAUSE WHEN THE FEDERAL
RESERVE THREES $3.5 BILLION AT
THE RECESSION OF OURS SOMETHING
IS BOUND TO HAPPEN.
WE HAVE SEEN REAL ESTATE
REINFLATE AND JUNK BONDS HAVE
SUCH AN AMAZE GUESS TIME.
MICHAEL MILL KEN WOULD BLUSH AND
THE STOCK MARKET HAS HAD ITS
BEST YEAR SINCE 1997.
I DON'T THINK ANYBODY EXPECTED
THIS.
LAST YEAR AT THIS TIME PEOPLE
WERE SAYING MAYBE HIGH SINGLE
DIGITS, TEENS AT BEST BUT TO BE
AT ALMOST 30 PERCENT IN TERMS OF
TOTAL TERMS IS EXCITE.
>> AND HARRY HOLZER, AS A LABOR
ECONOMIST AND YOU WORK FROM THE
STREET LEVEL UP, WHAT DID YOU
SEE?
>> THE THE ECONOMY HAS NOT BEEN
THAT STRONG AS YOU SAID EARLIER.
OVERALL GP GROWTH HAS BEEN
2579 PERCENT SO FAR THIS YEAR.
THAT'S ONLY SLIGHTLY BETTER THAN
THE LITTLE OVER 2 PERCENT THAT
IT HAS BEEN THROUGHOUT THIS
RECOVERY.
JOB GROWTH WAS DECENT, AGAIN BY
THE STANDARDS OF THIS RECOVERY,
CLOSE TO 200,000 A MONTH, BUT
NOT GREAT.
SO I WISH THAT THOSE GAMES HAD
BEEN MORE WIDELY SHARED BY
WORKERS IN THE ECONOMY.
>> SO LET'S PICK UP ON SOME OF
THESE THINGS.
FIRST OF ALL, WHAT SECTORS WERE
DOING -- I GUESS WERE ALL
SECTORS GOING GANGBUSTERS OR
WHAT DO YOU SEE HAPPENING?
>> EVERY SECTOR, IF YOU LOOK AT
SECTORS OF THE MARKET, WAS UP.
BUT WHAT WAS HAPPENING WAS THE
ECONOMICALLY SENSITIVE SECTORS
OF THE MARKETS, THESE ARE A
LITTLE TECHNICAL CONSUMER
CYCLICAL INDUSTRIALS, TECHNOLOGY
SECTORS WERE UP.
THE SAFE SECTORS OF THE MARKET,
THE SECTORS THAT DO WELL WHEN
THE ECONOMY IS IN A RECESSION OR
WORSE, SUCH AS UTILITIES,
TELECOMMUNICATIONS, CONSUMER
STAPLES, THEY WERE UP BUT THEY
WEREN'T UP AS MUCH.
SO WHAT THE MESSAGE OF THE
MARKET WAS IS THAT, YES, THE
ECONOMY WAS NOT DOING
PARTICULARLY WELL IN 2013,
CERTAINLY WORSE THAN IT DID IN
2012, BUT THE MESSAGE OF WHEN
YOU TAKE A LOOK AT THE SECTOR
PERFORMANCE, NOW WELL JUST STICK
AROUND BECAUSE CONDITIONS ARE
IMPROVING.
IN 2014 IT WILL BE BETTER, MAYBE
CONSIDERABLY BETTER THAN IN 2013
WHEN YOU LUKE AT THE SECTORS.
>> ROBIN, YOU'RE SUGGESTING A
LOT OF THIS IS DUE TO THE FED.
>> YES, FINANCIAL AID.
>> FINANCIAL AID?
>> FIVE YEARS, ZERO INTEREST
RATE POLICY.
YOU'RE NOT GETTING ANYTHING FOR
YOUR MONEY IN THE BANK, AND THE
OPPORTUNITY COST IS THAT OVER
FIVE YEARS.
BORROWING COSTS HAVE BEEN HIGH
AT A TIME OF DEFICITS AND PEOPLE
ARE LOOKING FOR RETURNS.
WHEN THEY MAXIMUM OUT THE
OPPORTUNITIES IN THE BOND
MARKETS THEY LOOK AT REAL ESTATE
OR JUNK BONDS, AND THEN
INCREASINGLY EQUITIES, VERSUS
HIGH QUALITY EQUITIES AND THEN
JUNK EQUITIES AND NEXT THING YOU
KNOW FACEBOOK IS WORTH AS MUCH
AS DISNEY.
THIS IS HOW THESE THINGS HAPPEN
AND THERE'S A VERNACULAR AND
THEY CALL ATE MELT-UP WHEN
EVERYBODY REALIZES THEY HAVE TO
GET IN AND THEY PILE MONEY IN
AND YOU GET SITUATIONS ACOIN TO
WHAT WE SAW IN LATE 99, MUCH OF
86 AND 87 AND YOU KNOW HOW THOSE
TWO EPISODES ENDED.
>> IS THAT WHAT YOU SEE
HAPPENING?
>> PEOPLE ARE WORRIED ABOUT IT
TO THE EXTENT FOR THE FIRST TIME
IN 13 YEARS THIS VOLUME OF CASH
AND RETAIL MONEY IS COMING INTO
THE MARKET.
HOW IS THAT GOING TO BE RESOLVED
IF THERE'S AN EXOGENOUS SHOCK OR
IF THE FEDERAL RESERVE HAS TO
SLAM THE BREAKS IN 2014?
WE DON'T KNOW BECAUSE AT NO
POINT IN THE HISTORY OF THE
FEDERAL RESERVE HAVE THEY THROWN
NEARLY $4 BILLION AT A PROBLEM.
>> HOW DO YOU SEE THE
DISCONNECT?
THIS WARM UP HAPPENS AT A TIME
OF SLOW GROWTH IN THE JOB
MARKET, SLOW GROWTH IN THE
ECONOMY, GOVERNMENT SHUT DOWN,
ALL KINDS OF LINK.
>> I BELIEVE ROB SAID, WHAT HE
SAID A PARTLY TRUE RTS, WHAT YOU
MIGHT CALL A FINANCIAL BUBBLE
BUT NOT ALL OF IT.
STOCK PRICES TODAY REFLECT
PEOPLE'S EXPECTATIONS OF
CORPORATE PROFITS TOMORROW AND
DOWN THE ROAD.
AND I THINK THAT PEOPLE ARE
EXPECTING STRONG PROFITS.
THEY EXPERIENCED FAIRLY STRONG
PROFITS EVEN IF THE WEAK
ECONOMY.
I THINK MOST ECONOMIST PRESS
EXPERIENCING AND PREDICTING AN
UPTICK IN GROWTH, TWO AND A HALF
OR 3, 4 PERCENT OVER THE NEXT
FEW YEARS AND THAT WOULD JUSTIFY
SOME OF THE INCREASE IN STOCK
PRICES.
THE OTHER THING THAT WE HAVE
LEARNED IS THAT PEOPLE CAN DO
WELL IF YOU OWN FINANCIAL ASSETS
OR BUSINESSES, EVEN WHEN
AMERICAN WORKERS AREN'T BEING
HIRED VERY MUCH TO PRODUCE GOODS
AND SERVICES HERE.
>> AND WHEN WE SAY PEOPLE ARE
DOING WELL, ONE QUESTION IS WHO
IS DOING WELL?
>> THE PEOPLE THAT OWN THOSE
FINANCIAL ASSETS OR THE
BUSINESSES OF THE AMERICAN
ECONOMY.
AND THIS IS A LONGER TERM.
THIS IS A STORY OF OVER THE LAST
30 YEARS, VERY POWERFUL FORCES
LIKE TECHNOLOGY AND
GLOBALIZATION, THEY HAVE CREATED
OPPORTUNITIES FOR THOSE OWNERS
TO MAKE MONEY.
BUT A LOT OF THAT BENEFITING THE
AVERAGE AMERICAN WORKER IN THE
ECONOMY.
>> YOU TAKE THIS LINE FROM
PASSOVER AND SAY WHAT MAKES THIS
RECOVERY DIFFERENT FROM OTHERS?
IT'S NOT QUITE THIS SEASON
BUT --
>> I'M GETTING AHEAD OF MYSELF.
>> OK.
>> NEVER, I DON'T THINK, IN THE
RECENT HISTORY HAVE YOU HAD
UNEMPLOYMENT THIS CHRONICALLY
HIGH FOR SO LONG WITH THE MARKET
HAVING DONE THIS WELL.
THERE'S A STEP THAT OBAMA'S GOLD
MARKET JUST BEAT RONALD
REAGAN'S.
IF YOU ASKED THE MAN ON THE
STREET NO ONE WOULD GUESS THAT
WE BEAT THE DECADE OF DECADENCE.
>> WHAT IS INTERESTING TO ME,
PROFESSOR, AT WHAT POINT DO YOU
SEE COMPANIES FEELING SO FLUSH
THAT THEY SEE THEIR STOCK PRICES
AND MARKET CAPITOLLIZATIONS UP
THAT THEY HAVE TO GO OUT AND
HIRE?
THERE'S SO MUCH STLAK IN THE
ECONOMY RIGHT NOW THEY CAN NAME
THEIR TERMS AND BRING ON
TEMPORARY WORKERS.
>> LET ME HUGH BACK IN.
>> I DON'T THINK HIRING WORKERS
IS BASED ON THE CAPITALIZATION.
THE DECISION TO HIRE WORKS IS
WHEN THEY NEED MORE GOODS AND
SERVICES.
AT 3 AND 4 PERCENT ECONOMIC
GROWTH IF WE GET THAT THEY WILL
NEED MORE WORKERS AND THAT WILL
MEAN SOME OF THE MONEY WILL BE
MORE WIDELY SPREAD.
AT 2 PERCENT THEY HAVEN'T NEEDED
MANY.
>> HUGH JOHNSON, YOU SOUND LIKED
YOU ARE TELLING A MORE POSITIVE
STORY ABOUT WHAT IS HAPPENING
HERE.
>> HAD THERE'S NO QUESTION THIS
IS A DIFFERENT KIND OF A
RECOVERY.
THERE'S NO QUESTION THAT WE'RE
SEEING THAT FUNDAMENTAL SHIFT IN
THE ECONOMY FROM A
LABOR-INTENSIVE ECONOMY TO A
KNOWLEDGE-DRIVEN ECONOMY AND
THERE'S GOING TO BE A BIG
DIFFERENCE OF SEPARATION BETWEEN
THE HAVES AND THE HAVE-NOTES BUT
I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO
REMEMBER, YES, THIS RECOVERY HAS
BEEN VERY ANEMIC BUT IT'S NOT
THE FIRST TIME WE HAVE SEEN AN
ANEMIC RECOVERY COMING OUT OF A
BUBBLE, THE PREVIOUS BEING THE
20042005 HOUSING BUBBLE AND WE
HAVE BEEN CUTTING THE EXCESSES,
THE MORTGAGE DEBT FROM THE 2004,
2005 BUBBLE AND THAT'S LIKELY TO
DO EXACTLY WHAT IT IS DOING AND
THAT IS A SERVE AS A DRAG ON THE
GROWTH OF THE EMPLOYMENT AND THE
ECONOMY.
BUT KIND IN MIND, ALL OF THIS,
THE DELEVERAGING PROCESS IS
GETTING HEALED.
WE'RE WORKING OUR WAY THROUGH IT
AND THEREFORE I THINK THE
MESSAGE OF THE MARKET IS, WE'RE
SUCCESSFULLY GOING THROUGH THE
PROCESS AND WE'RE SUCCESSFULLY
ELIMINATING THOSE EXCESSES AND
IN TIMES YOU WILL GET BETTER
EMPLOYMENT NUMBERS N TIME YOU
WILL GET BETTER ECONOMIC
NUMBERS.
JUST BE PATIENT.
THIS IS THE WAY IT WORKS WHEN
YOU'RE COMING OUT OF A MANIA OF
THE SORT WE SAW IN 2004, 2005.
>> LOOKING AHEAD, ROBEN FIRST,
WHAT KEY INDICATOR DO YOU LOOK
FOR TO KNOW HOW THIS IS GOING TO
GO.
RESERVE.
PEOPLE ARE UNDERESTIMATING HOW
IMPORTANT THIS IS.
THE BEN BERNANKE UNPRECEDENTED
EXPERIENCE AND NOW HE IS LEAVING
OFFICE AND YELLEN IS COMING IN
AND FEW PEOPLE RECALL WHEN ALLEN
GREENSPAN CAME IN AND INCREASED
THE RATES AND WALL STREET TOOK A
POWERFUL SHOCK AND SOME FIRMS
FAILED.
IF THINGS SPEED UP FAST EVER
THAN EXPECTED AND THEY WILL HAVE
TO BACKTRACK ON QUANTITATIVE
EXCESSES OF ONE, TWO, AND THREE,
IS THE WORLD PREPARED FOR
INTEREST RATES TO GO UP?
THIS IS FIVE YEARS WHERE
INTEREST RATES HAVE BEEN NEAR
ZERO.
>> WHAT KEY INDICATOR DO YOU
LOOK FOR?
>> I LOOK FOR EMPLOYMENT AND
EARNINGS AND THEN BEYOND THAT,
WHOSE EMPLOYMENT AND HUES EARN
REHABILITATION RISING.
HUGH IS RIGHT, WHEN WE FINISHED
THE DELEVERAGING PROCESS THAT
WILL HELP THE BROADER ECONOMY
GROW, MAYBE IF WE HAVE LESS
MADNESS IN WASHINGTON, D.C. AND
WE REDUCE UNCERTAINTY.
BUT IF YOU LOOK AT THE LAST 30
YEARS, EXCEPT FOR THE LATE
1990'S, YOU HAVE HAD OUTPUT
GROWTH AND PRODUCTIVITY
DISPROPORTIONATELY IN THE HANDS
OF HIGH INCOME PEOPLE AND IT HAS
BEEN HARD.
IF YOU LOOK AT THE ENTIRE CYCLE
OF 2000 TO 2007 WORKERS SHARE
RELATIVELY LITTLE IN THE OUTWARD
GROWTH THAT OCCURRED.
I'M HOPING THAT IS THE CASE THIS
TIME.
AND IF THE 3 TO 4 PERCENT
PREDICTION OF GROWTH HOLDS TRUE
SOMEWHAT MORE OF IT WILL END UP
IN THE POCKETS OF WORKERS BUT
NOT NECESSARILY A LOT OR ALL.
>> ALL RIGHT.
I'M HAPPY AND IT'S THE END OF
THE YEAR.
HALF HALF, HUGH JOHNSON, ROBEN
FARZAD, THANK YOU VERY MUCH AND
HAPPY NEW YEAR.
>> THANK YOU.
>>
>> Sreenivasan: IN SYRIA TODAY,
AT LEAST TEN PEOPLE WERE KILLED
WHEN A MISSILE WAS FIRED INTO A
BUS IN A REBEL-HELD AREA IN THE
CITY OF ALEPPO.
MEANWHILE, THE COUNTRY'S
GOVERNMENT MISSED A KEY
INTERNATIONAL DEADLINE, PUSHING
BACK THE DESTRUCTION OF SOME OF
ITS DEADLIEST WEAPONS MATERIALS.
SO R, TFAHE SYRIAN GOVERNMENT
HAS DISMANTLED CHEMICAL WEAPONS
EQUIPMENT AND STRUCTURES UNDER A
U.S.-RUSSIAN AGREEMENT APPROVED
BY THE UNITED NATIONS.
THE REGIME ALSO HAD UNTIL YEAR'S
END TO REMOVE PRECURSORS TO
SARIN AND OTHER NERVE GASES FROM
ITS BORDERS.
BUT THE ORGANIZATION FOR THE
PROHITIOIBN OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS,
OVERSEEING THE OPERATION, SAYS
WINTER WEATHER AND FIGHTING
ACROSS SYRIA DELAYED MOVING THE
CHEMICALS.
>> SECURITY-- I THINK ALL
PARTIES AGREE THAT THIS IS, OF
COURSE, A BIG CONCERN, ALWAYS.
BUT IT ALSO IMPACTS THE SAFETY
OF ANY CONVOY AND THE SAFETY OF
ANY EFFORT.
SO, YOU NEED TO PLAN TO MAKE
EVERYTHING AS SECURE AND SAFE AS
POSSIBLE FOR THE CIVILIAN
POPULATION, FOR THOSE WHO NEED
TO CONDUCT THE OPERATION.
>> Sreenivasan: THE ORIGINAL
PLAN WAS TO HAVE THE CHEMICALS
DESTROYED ON LAND OUTSIDE OF
SYRIA.
HOWEVER, A NUMBER OF COUNTRIES
REFUSED TO PARTICIPATE,
INCLUDING ALBANIA, WHERE THERE
WERE STREET PROTESTS OVER THE
PROSPECT.
THE LATEST PLAN CALLS FOR
RUSSIAN ARMORED VEHICLES TO
DELIVER THE CHEMICALS FROM 12
STORAGE SITES ACROSS SYRIA TO
THE COASTAL CITY OF LATAKIA.
DANISH AND NORWEGIAN SHIPS WILL
THEN TRANSPORT THE MATERIAL
UNDER NAVAL ESCORT TO A PORT IN
ITALY THAT HAS NOT BEEN MADE
PUBLIC.
THERE, THE BULK CHEMICALS WILL
BE TRANSFERRED TO A U.S. NAVAL
VESSEL AND THEN TAKEN TO AN
UNDISCLOSED LOCATION AT SEA TO
BE DESTROYED.
FOR NOW, DANISH AND NORWEGIAN
TASK FORCES CONTINUE TRAINING AT
CYPRUS TO MAKE SURE NOTHING GOES
WRONG.
>> IT COULD ALSO BE A WORST CASE
SCENARIO LIKE, FOR INSTANCE, A
CONTAINER SLIPPING OVER AND SOME
SPILL HAS OCCURRED AND SOME
CONTAMINATION HAS OCCURRED.
SHOULD THE NEED BE, WE CAN GO
ONBOARD THE MISSION VESSELS, WE
CAN TAKE OUT THE PERSONS WHICH
MIGHT BE CONTAMINATED, AND WE
CAN CLEAN THEM, WE CAN STABILIZE
THEM AND WE CAN EVACUATE THEM TO
A HOSPITAL.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE'S NO WORD
ON EXACTLY WHEN THE CHEMICAL
AGENTS WILL BE SHIPPED, BUT
SYRIA HAS UNTIL THE END OF JUNE
TO COMPLETE THE DESTRUCTION OF
ITS CHEMICAL ARSENAL AND
EVERYTHING TIED TO IT.
A SHORT TIME AGO, I SPOKE TO
ANGELA KANE, THE UNITED NATIONS
HIGH REPRESENTATIVE FOR
DISARMAMENT AFFAIRS, ABOUT THE
MISSED DEADLINE AND PROGRESS SO
FAR IN SECURING CHEMICAL WEAPONS
INSIDE THE WAR TORN COUNTRY.
>> IT'S BEEN ABOUT THREE AND A
HALF MONTHS SINCE SYRIA AGREED
TO DO AWAY WITH ITS CHEMICAL
WEAPONS.
WHAT HAS BEEN ACCOMPLISHED SO
FAR?
>> WELL, IT'S BEEN A TREMENDOUS
AMOUNT ACCOMPLISHED SO FAR.
THEY HAVE ACTUALLY DECLARED ALL
OF THE SITES THAT THEY HAVE,
THEY DECLARED NOT ONLY WHAT THEY
PROFESS IN TERMS OF CHEMICAL
AGENTS BUT THE PRODUCTION
FACILITIES, THE MUNITIONS
FACILITIES AND THEY HAVE ALREADY
DESTROYED A GREAT PART OF THOSE
FACILITIES MEANING THEY HAVE
COMPLIED WITH THE DEADLINE IN
ADVANCE OF THE DEADLINE SET BY
THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION
AND BY THE SECURE KREUNL OF THE
ORGANIZATION FOR THE PROHIBITION
OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS, THE OPCW.
>> WHAT DEADLINE WASN'T MET
TODAY.
WHAT IS THE EXPECTATION OF WHEN
IT WILL BE?
>> WHAT HAS TO HAPPEN IS THAT
THE MATERIALS WILL BE
TRANSPORTED OUTSIDE OF SYRIA, AT
LEAST WHAT WE CALL THE PRIORITY
ONE CHEMICALS AND THOSE ARE THE
MOST IMPORTANT, MOST DANGEROUS
CHEMICALS.
THE TIMELINE IS EXTREMELY
AMBITIOUS AS SET UP AND NOTHING
HAS EVER HAPPENED BEFORE IN A
COUNTRY THAT IS ACTUALLY TORN BY
CONFLICT, SO THE SYRIAN
GOVERNMENT HAS SAID TO US, AND
TO THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY,
WE DO NOT HAVE EVERYTHING IN
PLACE TO TRANSPORT THESE
MATERIALS.
WE NEED ARMORED TRUCKS, WE NEED
LOADING CAPACITY.
WE NEED PACKING MATERIAL AND SO
FORTH.
SO WHAT THE INTERNATIONAL
COMMUNITY HAS DONE WITH THE
ASSISTANCE OF SEVERAL VERY
GENEROUS OTHER COUNTRIES IS THEY
HAVE GIVEN THESE MATERIALS BUT
NOT RIGHT NOW EVERYTHING IS IN
PLACE BUT WE FEEL A START CAN BE
MADE SOON, WITHIN DAYS I HOPE.
>> WHAT ARE ALL OF THOSE DUTIES
THAT ARE REQUIRED TO MOVE TONS
OF DANGEROUS CHEMICALS ACROSS A
WAR ZONE?
>> WELL, THAT IS BASICALLY A
PROBLEM.
FOR EXAMPLE, THEY ASKED FOR
ARMORED TRUCKS AND IT'S
DIFFICULT TO GET ARMORED
VEHICLES MUCH LESS ARMORED
TRUCKS.
THERE'S NOT A BIG SUPPLY IN THE
WORLD.
IT HAS TO BE PROCURED AND THERE
WAS A TREMENDOUS EFFORT TO
RETAIN THE MATERIALS ASKED FOR
AND BIG DRUMS WERE NEEDED,
SPECIALIZED PACKING MATERIAL,
AND A LOT OF THAT HAS BEEN
PROCURED AND A LOT OF THAT IS
ALREADY IN PLACE AND WHAT WE
FEEL NOW IS THAT A START CAN BE
MADE TO START TRANSPORTING THESE
MATERIALS TO THE PORTAL.
BUT ON THE OTHER HAND WHAT ALSO
HAS NOT HELPED IS THERE'S BEEN
VERY ADVERSE WEATHER CONDITIONS
IN THE REGION.
AS YOU HAVE HARYDZ THERE'S BEEN
SNOW IN THE REGION AND SO THE
WEATHER CONDITION HAS NOT
PARTICULARLY HELPED AS ALSO THE
UNSTABLE SITUATION AND THE
FIGHTING IN SOME OF THE AREAS
HAS ALREADY GIVEN RISE TO
SECURITY CONS ISOLATIONS.
SPEAKING OF THE SECURITY
CONSIDERATIONS WHAT HAPPENS IF
ONE OF THESE CONVOYS GETS
ATTACKED?
WE KNOW THE CONVOYS HAVE TO MOVE
AND SO DO THE FIGHTERS ON THE
GROUND?
>> WHAT I THINK THAT WE SHOULD
REMEMBER IS THAT AN APPEAL HAS
BEEN MADE TO ALL SIDES TO LET
THE MATERIALS LEAVE THE COUNTRY
UNHINDERED AND I DO HOPE THOSE
WHO MAY HAVE HAD PLANS TO ATTACK
ANY CONVOY HAVE ABANDONED THEM
AND I THINK THE EXTRA
PRECAUTION, AGAIN, IS THAT THESE
WILL BE ARMORED TRUCKS AND THEY
WILL BE WELL PROTECTED, WELL
PROTECTED INSIDE THE TRUCKS AND
ALSO WELL PROTECTED WITH THE
PACKING MATERIALS AND THE DRUMS
AND THERE ARE REALLY SPECIAL
PRECAUTIONS TAKEN IN ORDER NOT
TO ENDANGER ANY POSSIBLE
ACCIDENTS OR ATTACKS.
LET'S SAY BEST CASE SCENARIO,
THEY MAKE IT ALL ON TO THE
SHIPS.
WHAT HAPPENS ON THE U.S. VESSEL
AND HOW DO THESE GET DESTROYED
AT SEA?
>> WELL, THE FIRST THING THAT
HAS TO HAPPEN, THEY HAVE TO BE
OFFLOADED FROM THE PORT AND THEY
WILL BE UNLOADED ON TO SHIPS.
AND THEN THEY WILL HAVE TO BE
TRANCE LOADED ON TO A SHIP THAT
HAS BEEN OUTFITTED WITH A
HYDROLOSUS MATERIALS AND THIS IS
SOMETHING THAT CAN HAPPEN SAFELY
ON BOARD OF SHIP.
IT WILL BE A COMPANY AND
VERIFIED ALSO BY OFFICIALS FROM
THE OPCW, BY PEOPLE WHO VERIFIED
THAT DESTRUCTION TAKES PLACE AND
THAT AT ONE POINT ALSO WHAT
NEEDS TO HAPPEN IS THAT THERE
WILL BE MATERIALS LIKE
INDUSTRIAL WASTE AS A BIPRODUCT
AND THAT NEEDS TO BE OFF LOADED
AND TAKEN CARE OF BY AN
INDUSTRIAL COMMERCIAL FACILITY
IN ORDER TO BE DISPOSED OF.
>> AND WHAT ABOUT THE
ENVIRONMENTAL RISK, REGARDLESS
OF WHERE IT IS IN THE
INTERNATIONAL WATERS, WHY IS IT
HAPPENING OUT THERE AND IS THERE
A RISK TO THOSE SEAS OR OCEANS
THAT IT'S HAPPENING ON?
>> WELL I HAVE FULL TRUST IN
THAT WHATEVER IS GOING TO HAPPEN
IS DONE WITH THE ENTIRE CONTROL
OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL RISK.
ALSO I SHOULD TELL YOU THAT WE
HAVE CONSULTED THE UNITED
NATIONS SPHRIRNL PROTECTION
AGENCY TO SEE WHAT CAN BE DONE
IN ORDER TO MINIMIZE ANY RISK
THAT CAN HAPPEN BUT I'M VERY
CONFIDENT THAT NO RISK WILL
EVOLVE.
BUT I THINK WE SHOULD KEEP IN
MIND THIS HAS NEVER HAPPENED
BEFORE.
NORMALLY WHEN A COUNTRY EXCEEDS
WITH THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS
CONVENTION THE COUNTRY SAYS WE
WILL DESTROY THE MATERIAL ON OUR
TERRITORY AND THEN THEY
BASICALLY HAVE TO BUILD
FACILITIES TO DO THAT.
BUT SYRIA RIGHT AWAY, WHEN THEY
JOINED, SAID WE WILL NOT BE IN A
POSITION TO DO THAT, YOU HAVE TO
HELP US, YOU, THE INTERNATIONAL
COMMUNITY AND PARTICULARLY THE
UNITED STATES WHICH HELPED
BROKER THIS AGREEMENTS.
>> IN THE UNs LAST REPORT IT
SAID THERE WERE AT LEAST THREE
CASES WHERE SYRIAN SOLDIERS WERE
ATTACKED WITH CHEMICAL WEAPONS
SO THERE'S SOME QUESTION AS TO
WHETHER REBEL GROUPS HAVE ACCESS
TO IT.
AS THE UN OR OPCW BEEN ABLE TO
FIND OR HAS THERE BEEN A DUPE
ACTIVE CONVERSATION WITH
EVERYONE, ALL OF THE PARTIES ON
THE GROUND?
>> I THINK THERE HAVE BEEN LOTS
OF CONVERSATIONS.
SOMETIMES THEY CALL THE UN THE
TALK SHOP.
IN A WAY WE ARE.
BUT BASICALLY IT'S TO DEEP THE
CHANNELS OPEN AND TALK TO ALL
SIDES.
WE HAVE ASCERTAINED THAT THERE
WERE -- THERE WAS ONE
LARGE-SCALE ATTACK WITH CHEMICAL
WEAPONS IN HOTA IN AUGUST AND
SEVERAL OTHER INCIDENTS OF
CHEMICAL WEAPONS USED BUT WE
HAVE NOT SAID WHO ACTUALLY HAS
USED THOSE CHEMICAL WEAPONS, WHO
IS RESPONSIBLE FOR THOSE
CHEMICAL WEAPONS.
THAT WAS OUTSIDE OF THE MANDATE
OF THE INVESTIGATION MISSION.
IT WAS THEIR MANDATE TO ONLY
DETERMINE WHETHER OR NOT
CHEMICAL AGENTS OR CHEMICAL
WEAPONS WERE USED AND THEY DID
SO AND IT'S A VERY COMPREHENSIVE
REPORT AND I THINK THAT THEY
HAVE BEEN VERY MUCH LAUDED AND
VERY MUCH PRAISE DIZZY FOR A
REPORT THAT WAS SO IMPARTIAL IN
MANY WAYS AND I'M VERY HAPPY
THAT THE UNITED NATIONS DID THE
SERVICE FOR THE INTERNATIONAL
COMMUNITY AND ALSO FOR THE
PEOPLE WHO WERE AFFECTED.
>> SO FINALLY I HAVE TO ASK WHAT
IS THE SITUATION ON THE GROUND,
WHAT KIND OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS,
WHAT CHEMICALS ARE STILL LEFT IN
SYRIA?
>> BASICALLY ALL CHEMICAL -- NOT
THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS.
THE WEAPONS HAVE BEEN DESTROYED.
THE FACILITIES HAVE BEEN
DESTROYED AND ALSO THEY HAVE
DESTROYED FACTORIES WHERE SOME
OF THESE MATERIALS WERE BEING
HELD AND POSSIBLY USED FOR
MIXING MATERIALS.
SO WHAT IS LEFT NOW IS THE
CHEMICAL THEMSELVES.
THEY ARE THE ONES THAT NEED TO
BE TAKEN OUT OF THE COUNTRY AND
THERE ARE TWO CATEGORIES AND THE
FIRST CATEGORY IS PRIORITY ONE
AS WE CALL IT.
THAT'S THE MOST TOXIC CHEMICALS
AND THAT DEADLINE WAS THE 21st
ALSO ESTABLISHED BY THE OPCW IN
THEIR MEETINGS TOGETHER WITH THE
SYRIAN GOVERNMENT AND THE NEXT
DEADLINE WOULD BE FEBRUARY 15
WHEN THE NEXT BATCH WOULD BE
TAKEN OUT.
>> ANGELA KANE, THANK YOU FOR
JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU HARRY.
>> Sreenivasan: PRESCRIPTION
DRUGS ARE MORE EXPENSIVE IN THE
U.S. THAN ANYWHERE ELSE IN THE
WORLD.
THE STATE OF MAINE IS TRYING TO
MAKE IT EASIER TO BUY CHEAPER
MEDICATION FROM ABROAD, BUT DRUG
COMPANIES ARE FIGHTING THAT PLAN
IN COURT.
THAT'S THE SUBJECT OF ONE OF THE
SIGNATURE PIECES FROM THE
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND PROGRAM.
WE ARE FEATURING THEM THIS
HOLIDAY SEASON.
THIS REPORT IS BY NEWSHOUR
CORRESPONDENT RICK KARR
>> Reporter: THE BATTLE BETWEEN
THE STATE OF MAINE AND THE
PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY STARTED
IN PORTLAND WHEN THE CITY FOUND
A WAY TO CUT ITS HEALTH CARE
COSTS.
BY THE TIME THE BATTLE ENDS, THE
WHOLE COUNTRY MIGHT FEEL THE
EFFECTS.
IF MAINE WINS, IT COULD GET A
LOT EASIER FOR AMERICANS TO
IMPORT CHEAPER PRESCRIPTION
DRUGS.
IF THE PHARMACEUTICAL COMPANIES
AND THEIR ALLIES WIN, IMPORTING
DRUGS COULD BE HARDER THAN EVER.
ONE SIDE IN THE BATTLE IS MADE
UP OF EMPLOYERS AND THEIR
EMPLOYEES.
THEY SAY THEY'RE FIGHTING FOR
THE RIGHT TO SPEND LESS ON
HEALTH CARE.
HOW MUCH MONEY DOES THIS SAVE
THE COMPANY EVERY YEAR?
>> ABOUT $400,000.
THAT'S OUR SAVINGS PER YEAR.
>> Reporter: THE OTHER SIDE
INCLUDES MAINE'S PHARMACISTS AND
RETAILERS AND THE PHARMACEUTICAL
INDUSTRY.
THEY SAY THEY'RE FIGHTING TO
PROTECT THE SAFETY OF CONSUMERS
WHO MIGHT BE TEMPTED TO TRY
IMPORTED PRESCRIPTION DRUGS.
>> THE PROBLEM IS, IS THAT THESE
MEDICINES AREN'T SAFE.
>> Reporter: THE BATTLE STARTED
IN 2004, WHEN PORTLAND OFFERED
ITS 1,400 EMPLOYEES THE OPTION
OF A NEW PRESCRIPTION DRUG PLAN.
INSTEAD OF GOING TO LOCAL
PHARMACIES TO GET THEIR
PRESCRIPTIONS FILLED-- AND
PAYING A SHARE OF THE COST--
THEY COULD GET THE DRUGS BY MAIL
FROM LICENSED PHARMACIES IN
AUSTRALIA, NEW ZEALAND, CANADA,
AND THE U.K. WITHOUT PAYING A
PENNY.
CITY EMPLOYEE JEFF TARDIF SIGNED
HIS SEVEN-YEAR-OLD SON UP FOR
THE PLAN THIS YEAR TO GET ASTHMA
MEDS.
>> MY BIG THING IS, I'M SAVING
MONEY.
SO, YOU KNOW, IT'S $100 THAT I'M
SAVING MONTHLY THROUGH THIS
PROGRAM.
>> Reporter: KAREN PERCIVAL GETS
DRUGS THAT TREAT CHRONIC PAIN
AND A.D.H.D.
EVERY THREE MONTHS, A FRESH
SUPPLY FROM A PHARMACY HALFWAY
AROUND THE WORLD LANDS ON HER
DOORSTEP.
>> IT SHOWS UP IN A BOX LIKE
THAT.
IT'S ODD THAT IT COMES ALL THE
WAY FROM AUSTRALIA AND IT STILL
COSTS LESS MONEY.
>> Reporter: THE PROGRAM'S
MANAGED BY A CANADIAN COMPANY
CALLED CANARX.
IT TRACKS THE PRICES OF
PRESCRIPTION DRUGS IN FOUR
COUNTRIES.
WHICHEVER COUNTRY HAS THE LOWEST
IT FROM
LICENSED, BRICK-AND-MORTAR
PHARMACIES.
TAKE THE EXAMPLE OF A THREE-
MONTH SUPPLY OF THE ASTHMA DRUG
ADVAIR.
UNDER THE CITY'S REGULAR HEALTH
PLAN, AT PORTLAND PHARMACIES, IT
COSTS A LITTLE UNDER $600.
THE CANARX PLAN IMPORTS IT FOR A
LITTLE OVER A $150, SHIPPING
INCLUDED.
WITH DISCOUNTS LIKE THAT, THE
CITY OF PORTLAND SAVES $200,000
A YEAR ON HEALTH CARE, AND
THERE'S NO CO-PAY FOR EMPLOYEES.
TWO YEARS AFTER THE CITY
LAUNCHED ITS PROGRAM, THE
LARGEST EMPLOYER IN ONE OF
MAINE'S POOREST COUNTIES
FOLLOWED SUIT.
HARDWOOD PRODUCTS MAKES FOOD
STICKS, THE WOODEN HANDLES THAT
GO INTO POPSICLES, ICE CREAM
BARS, CORN DOGS AND SO ON.
CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER SCOTT
WELLMAN SAYS THE FAMILY-OWNED
COMPANY CAN DO A LOT WITH THE
$400,000 A YEAR IT SAVES ON THE
PLAN.
>> THAT MONEY CAN BE USED FOR
EMPLOYEE RAISES.
THAT MONEY CAN BE USED TO OFFSET
THE COST OF THEIR HEALTH CARE.
IT ALSO CAN BE USED TO INVEST IN
EQUIPMENT SO WE CAN PRODUCE NEW
PRODUCTS.
>> Reporter: EARLY LAST YEAR,
THE STATE OF MAINE'S EMPLOYEE
HEALTH CARE PROGRAM DECIDED TO
OFFER THE CANARX OPTION.
OVERNIGHT, THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE
ELIGIBLE FOR THE PLAN IN MAINE
WENT FROM ABOUT 3,200 TO MORE
THAN 33,000.
AND THAT'S WHEN MAINE'S
PHARMACISTS DECIDED THEY HAD TO
DO SOMETHING TO STOP IT.
>> WHEN WE FOUND OUT THAT THE
MAINE STATE EMPLOYEES UNION WAS
GOING TO BE CONTRACTING WITH
THIS ORGANIZATION, CANARX, WE
REALIZED THAT IT WAS AGAINST
BOTH STATE AND FEDERAL LAW AT
THAT TIME.
>> Reporter: MAINE PHARMACIST
AMELIA ARNOLD AND OTHER
OPPONENTS OF MAIL-ORDER DRUGS
SAY THE IMPORTS VIOLATE THE
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG ANDOSME CTIC
ACT AND THAT THEY RAN AFOUL OF
STATE BE
PHARMACY BOARD HADN'T LICENSED
THE FOREIGN PHARMACIES TO
PRACTICE IN THE STATE.
ARNOLD ADMITS THAT MAINE
RESIDENTS HAVE BEEN CROSSING THE
BORDER INTO CANADA FOR YEARS TO
GET CHEAPER DRUGS FROM RETAIL
PHARMACIES, LIKE THESE SENIORS
DID IN THE EARLY 2000s BEFORE
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT EXPANDED
MEDICARE BENEFITS.
BUT SHE SAYS MAIL-ORDER
LOWMACIES IN CANADA MAY OPERATE
STANDARDS.
>> WHO'S GOING TO POLICE THAT?
WHO'S GOING TO FIND OUT THAT THE
PHARMACY'S LEGITIMATE?
THOSE COMPANIES CAN PARTICIPATE
IN WHAT WE CALL PARALLEL
IMPORTATION.
SO, THEY CAN GET THEIR DRUGS
FROM OTHER COUNTRIES.
JUST BECAUSE IT'S COMING INTO
THE U.S. FROM CANADA DOESN'T
MEAN THAT IT STARTED IN CANADA.
>> Reporter: ARNOLD SAYS THE
MEDICINES MIGHT BE OLD,
INEFFECTIVE OR EVEN COUNTERFEIT.
IN SEPTEMBER OF LAST YEAR,
MAINE'S THEN-ATTORNEY GENERAL
AGREED WITH THE PHARMACISTS THAT
IMPORTING DRUGS VIOLATED STATE
LAW.
SO, CANARX SUSPENDED ALL THREE
OF ITS PROGRAMS IN MAINE.
>> WE WERE VERY ANGRY, WOULD
PROBABLY BE THE BEST WAY OF
PUTTING IT.
>> Reporter: SCOTT WELLMAN SAYS
THE RULING INFLICTED A LOT OF
PAIN ON THE EMPLOYEES OF
HARDWOOD PRODUCTS.
>> THEY HAD TO MAKE THE
DECISIONS ON, "OKAY, DO I TURN
THE HEAT DOWN IN THE WINTER?
WHAT DO I DO?"
BECAUSE THEY STOPPED TAKING ONE
WHILE THE PROGRAM WAS SUSPENDED.
>> Reporter: WELLMAN DECIDED IT
WAS TIME TO PUSH BACK, SO HE
REACHED OUT TO A LOCAL FIREWOOD
DEALER.
>> YOU DON'T GET TO TAKE
ADVANTAGE OF PEOPLE.
"I HAVE THIS DRUG, THIS PILL,
AND IT WILL SAVE YOUR LIFE.
WHAT WILL YOU GIVE ME FOR IT?"
IS THAT THE WAY WE DO BUSINESS
IN THE UNITED STATES?
AND, OF COURSE, YOU'RE GOING TO
PAY WHATEVER YOU HAVE TO, TO
SAVE YOUR LIFE.
AND THAT'S NOT RIGHT.
IT'S REAL CLOSE, I THINK, TO
HOLDING A GUN TO PEOPLE'S HEAD.
AND IT'S WRONG.
>> Reporter: DOUG THOMAS SELLS
FIREWOOD AND SERVES AS A
REPUBLICAN STATE SENATOR.
HE CALLS HIMSELF A CONSERVATIVE,
SAYS HE HATES UNIONS AND
BELIEVES IN FREE ENTERPRISE AND
COMPETITION.
HE ALSO THINKS THE
PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY NEEDS
MORE REGULATION.
>> THE DRUG COMPANIES HAVE DONE
A VERY GOOD JOB AT TELLING
PEOPLE THAT THEY NEED ALL THIS
MONEY FOR RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT, AND IF WE DON'T
GIVE THEM EVERYTHING THEY WANT,
THEN WE'RE NOT GOING TO HAVE
THESE NEW DRUGS.
AND THAT'S, I JUST... I
ABSOLUTELY DON'T BELIEVE IT.
THE CANADIAN SYSTEM WORKS.
THE AUSTRALIAN SYSTEM WORKS.
THE DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEM IN NEW
ZEALAND WORKS.
AND IT CAN WORK BETTER HERE.
>> Reporter: THOMAS INTRODUCED A
BILL THAT LEGALIZED
PHARMACEUTICAL IMPORTS.
SO DID ONE OF HIS DEMOCRATIC
COLLEAGUES.
THEY ROLLED THEIR BILLS INTO ONE
AND JOINED FORCES, AND BOTH
SIDES OF THE ISSUE SENT THEIR
LOBBYISTS TO WORK.
>> I BELIEVE THERE WERE FOUR OF
US THAT WERE LOBBYING ON BEHALF
OF THE BILL; THERE WERE AT LEAST
12 LOBBYISTS FROM...
REPRESENTING PHARMACIES AND BIG
PHARMA.
>> Reporter: THE PHARMACISTS AND
DRUG COMPANIES ARGUED THE BILL
WOULD ENDANGER THE PEOPLE OF
MAINE.
BUT IN JUNE, THE BILL PASSED
BOTH HOUSES WITH BIPARTISAN
MAJORITIES.
MAINE BECAME THE FIRST STATE IN
THE NATION TO LEGALIZE MAIL-
ORDER DRUG IMPORTS.
IN SEPTEMBER, A MONTH BEFORE
IMPORTS COULD RESUME, THE
PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY AND ITS
ALLIES FILED A FEDERAL LAWSUIT
TO STRIKE DOWN THE LAW.
>> THERE'S SEVERAL THINGS WRONG
WITH THE MAINE LAW.
NOT LEAST OF WHICH IS THE FACT
THAT IT VIOLATES THE FEDERAL
FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION'S
LAWS PROHIBITING THE IMPORTATION
OF PRESCRIPTION MEDICATIONS
OUTSIDE OF THE F.D.A.'S
REGULATORY CONSTRUCT.
>> Reporter: JOHN MURPHY IS A
STAFF LAWYER AT PHARMA, THE DRUG
MAKERS' TRADE GROUP AND ONE OF
THE PLAINTIFFS IN THE SUIT.
HE SAYS FEDERAL LAW GIVES THE
FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION THE
AUTHORITY TO REGULATE DRUG
IMPORTS, AND THAT AUTHORITY'S
ILLEGALLY UNDERCUT BY THE MAINE
LAW.
>> EFFECTIVELY, IT PERMITS
PATIENTS TO GO ONTO THE
INTERNET, WHICH IS COMPLETELY
UNREGULATED, AND BRING
PRESCRIPTION DRUGS INTO THE
UNITED STATES OUTSIDE OF EVEN
THE F.D.A.'S LARGE FEDERAL
PREVIEW.
IT'S VERY CONCERNING.
>> Reporter: LIKE MAINE
PHARMACIST AMELIA ARNOLD, WHO'S
ONE OF THE LEAD PLAINTIFFS IN
THE SUIT, MURPHY SAYS STOPPING
MAIL-ORDER IMPORTS IS ALL ABOUT
SAFETY.
THEY SAY MOST DRUGS HAVE CHEAPER
GENERIC EQUIVALENTS, SO THERE'S
NO NEED TO TAKE A CHANCE ON
FOREIGN PHARMACEUTICALS.
MURPHY SAYS THAT IN 2003, THE
F.D.A. WARNED CANARX THAT IT WAS
"PUTTING THE HEALTH OF THE
AMERICAN PUBLIC AT RISK" AFTER
THE COMPANY MAILED AN ORDER OF
INSULIN, A PERISHABLE DRUG THAT
HAS TO BE REFRIGERATED.
CANARX SAYS AS SOON AS THAT
HAPPENED, IT STOPPED OFFERING
PERISHABLE DRUGS AND THAT IT HAS
SAFEGUARDS IN PLACE TO PROTECT
ITS CUSTOMERS.
WHAT A LOT OF THE PEOPLE IN
MAINE HAVE BEEN SAYING TO ME
THEY'RE SAYING, "THESE ARE THE
SAME DRUGS THAT ARE AVAILABLE IN
THE U.S.
THESE ARE DRUGS THAT THEY'RE
GETTING THAT ARE MADE BY MEMBERS
OF YOUR ORGANIZATION."
>> AND THEY'RE ABLE TO TEST
THOSE DRUGS WHEN THEY COME HOME
AND VERIFY THAT THEY ARE?
OR THAT THEY JUST HAVE A LABEL
ON THEM THAT INDICATES THAT THEY
ARE THE SAME DRUGS?
I MEAN, THAT'S THE INTERESTING
QUESTION, RIGHT?
I MEAN, NO ONE WHO'S PERSONALLY
IMPORTING A DRUG INTO THE UNITED
STATES AND BRINGING IT TO THEIR
HOME HAS REALLY ANY IDEA WHAT'S
IN THAT DRUG.
AND IN FACT, WE'VE SEEN EVEN IN
THE PAST THAT DRUGS THAT CAME IN
THROUGH CANADA, CERTAIN CANCER
DRUGS, WERE SOLD TO PHYSICIANS.
AND PHYSICIANS WEREN'T ABLE TO
VERIFY THE AUTHENTICITY OF THOSE
PRODUCTS.
>> Reporter: THE RESPONSE THAT
WE GET FROM PHRMA AND THE
PHARMACIST ASSOCIATION IS YOU
NEVER KNOW FOR SURE HOW RELIABLE
THESE PHARMACIES ARE.
AND IT'S TOO LATE IF SOMEBODY
GETS SICK ON ACCOUNT OF THIS.
DOES THIS CONCERN YOU AT ALL?
>> WITH OUR EXPERIENCE, IT
DOESN'T.
THE PHARMACIES THAT WERE HAVING
TO FILL THESE PRESCRIPTIONS ARE
LICENSED RETAIL PHARMACIES.
IF YOU'RE GETTING, FOR EXAMPLE,
CRESTOR, YOU GET CRESTOR IN THE
ASTRAZENECA PACKAGE LABELED WITH
ALL THEIR INFORMATION, WITH A
PHARMACY LABEL ON IT, WITH THE
SEAL ON THE OUTSIDE OF THE
PACKAGE, LOT NUMBER, DATE CODE,
EVERYTHING IS ON THE PACKAGE.
YOU CAN TRACE THE PEDIGREE JUST
LIKE YOU CAN IN THE U.S.
>> Reporter: WELLMAN SAYS HE
KNOWS WHAT HE'S TALKING ABOUT
CAUSBEE HE'S ALSO C.F.O. OF
HARDWOOD PRODUCTS' SIBLING
COMPANY, PURITAN PRODUCTS, RIGHT
ACROSS THE STET.RE
IT MAKES MEDICAL SUPPLIES.
>> WE HAVE LOTS AND DATE CODES.
WE HAVE EXPIRATIONS.
WE MAKE F.D.A.-REGISTERED
DEVICES HERE.
WE HAVE F.D.A. AUDITS THAT COME
IN HERE.
WE UNDERSTAND HOW THAT PROCESS
WORKS.
>> Reporter: WELLMAN SAYS HE
HOPES THE STATE OF MAINE
PREVAILS IN COURT SO MORE OF HIS
NEIGHBORS CAN TAKE ADVANTAGE OF
THE LOWER PRICES ON FOREIGN
DRUGS.
IF MAINE DOES WIN, OTHER STATES
ARE LIKELY TO FOLLOW ITS LEAD BY
ALLOWING MAIL-ORDER IMPORTS.
THE DATE OF OPENING ARGUMENTS IN
THE CASE, WHEN THE BATTLE MOVES
TO THE COURTROOM, HASN'T BEEN
SET.
>> WE TURN TO THE MAN WHO
USHERED IN A NEW ERA AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF MISSISSIPPI, OLE
MISS 20 GNERAETIONS OF STUDENTS
AND ALUMNI.
HIS NAME IS ROBERT KHAYAT, THE
FORTUNATELIER CHANCELLOR OF THE
UNIVERSITY.
THIS IMAGE FROM OCTOBER 1962 IS
SEARED IN OUR NATIONAL MEMORY, A
LONE BLACK MAN, JAMES MERIDITH,
ESCORTED BY FEDERAL AGENTS
ENROLLED AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
MISSISSIPPI IN OXFORD, AND A
RIOT ENSUED.
34 YEARS LATER, ROBERT KHAYAT
DEDICATED THIS STATUE OF
MERIDITH ON THE CAMPUS, ONE OF
THE MANY ACTIONS HE TOOK TO
ERASE THE SEGREGATED PAST.
ROBERT KHAYAT, BORN AND RAISED
IN MISSISSIPPI RETURNED TO LIST
ALMA MATTER IN 1995 AND RETIRED
IN 2000 FINAL.
JUDY TALKED TO HIM RECENTLY
ABOUT HIS NEW MEMORY OTHER "THE
EDUCATION OF A LIFETIME"
>> Woodruff: ROBERT KHAYAT,
THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR TALKING
WITH US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: SO, YOU'RE AN
UNUSUAL COMBINATION OF FORMER
FOOTBALL PLAYER-- COLLEGE
FOOTBALL, PROFESSIONAL FOOTBALL,
WHO WENT ONTO TEACH LAW, RUN A
BIG UNIVERSITY.
HOW DID ATHLETICS SHAPE WHO YOU
ARE?
>> JUDY, ATHLETICS IS ALWAYS A
PART OF MY LIFE.
AS A CHILD, MY FATHER HAD BEEN A
COACH, AND SO THE LESSONS OF THE
ATHLETICS: DISCIPLINE, PRACTICE,
REPETITION, COMMITMENT, LOYALTY,
TEAMWORK, THOSE SORTS OF VALUES
WERE JUST A PART OF GROWING UP.
I WAS ALSO IN A FAMILY OF SIX,
AND WE OPERATED AS A TEAM
BECAUSE WE HAD TO.
AND SO, TEAM BECAME ENGRAINED IN
ME, AND I THINK THE LESSON I
LEARNED AS A CHILD, AS A SEMI-
ADULT PLAYING PROFESSIONAL
FOOTBALL AND THEN LATER REALLY
SERVED ME WELL WHEN I BECAME THE
CHANCELLOR OF THE UNIVERSITY.
ONE OF THE RULES OF FOOTBALL
THAT PEOPLE OFTEN OVERLOOK IS
THAT EVERY 25 SECONDS OR 30, OR
45-- IT KEEPS CHANGING-- IS THAT
THE BALL IS GOING TO BE SNAPPED.
AND SO YOU REALLY HAVE THREE
CHOICES.
YOU CAN EITHER PLAY, YOU CAN GET
STEPPED ON OR YOU CAN GET OFF
THE FIELD.
>> WHEN YOU FOUND IT WAS A LOT
HARDER.
>> I DID.
THAT WAS ABOUT THE INTENSITY OF
THE EMOTION AND THE TRADITIONAL
SOUTHERN SUMMERS.
I KNEW THAT THERE WERE PROBLEMS
FOR US, NATIONAL PROBLEMS,
BECAUSE PERCEPTION IS TO SONG
IMPORTANT
IN 1962, WHEN WE HAD THE RIOT AT
OLE MISS OVER THE INTEGRATION OF
THE SCHOOL, AND IT BECAME
INTERNATIONAL NEWS, THE
PERCEPTION OF OLE MISS WAS
ESTABLISHED.
AND I DECIDED THAT AS CHANCELLOR
OF THE FLAGSHIP UNIVERSITY OF
THE STATE...
>> Woodruff: 30 YEARS LATER.
>> YEAH, 30 YEARS LATER.
I THINK I'VE LEARNED A LOT
THROUGH THE YEARS.
I KNEW THAT WE COULD ADDRESS IT.
I DIDN'T KNOW WHAT WE COULD DO
WITH IT, BUT I KNEW WE HAD TO
ADDRESS IT.
AND BY "IT," I MEAN RACISM, AND
POVERTY, AND LITERACY AND REALLY
THE FUNDAMENTAL VALUE OF
RESPECT.
ONE INDIVIDUAL RESPECTING
ANOTHER INDIVIDUAL.
>> Woodruff: THE REACTION WAS
REALLY WAS NOT JUST NEGATIVE,
SOME OF IT WAS UGLY, THERE WERE
DEATH THREATS, WHAT DID YOU
LEARN GOING THROUGH THAT?
TELL US ABOUT SOME OF THE WAYS
PEOPLE RESPONDED.
>> WELL, THE MOST SHOCKING OF
ALL OF THEM, I THINK, WAS THE
DEATH THREAT LETTERS THAT CAME
FROM ALL ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
THERE WERE PEOPLE WHO LIVED IN
FAR WEST STATES AND FAR EASTERN
STATES WHO WROTE LETTERS SAYING
"YOU WON'T LIVE TO SEE THIS
EFFORT COMPLETED, YOUR FAMILY
WILL NEITHER AND NEITHER OF YOU
WILL SEE US COMING."
I WAS STUNNED BY THE LEVEL OF
HATE AND ANGER THAT SURROUNDED
THAT PARTICULAR ISSUE.
AND IT WAS SO INTERESTING AS I
LOOKED BACK-- IT WASN'T
INTERESTING AT THE TIME-- IT
BECAME INTERESTING AFTERWARDS,
WHEN I LOOKED BACK AND I THOUGHT
ABOUT HOW MUCH EMOTION IS
INVESTED IN SYMBOLS AS OPPOSED
TO SUBSTANCE.
I MEAN, I THINK OF THE
UNIVERSITY IN TERMS OF A PLACE
WHERE PEOPLE GO TO THINK FREELY
AND SPEAK FREELY AND EXPERIMENT
AND CHALLENGE.
AND THAT FEAR OF THAT KIND OF
REPRISAL, BUT WHEN YOU GET INTO
THAT SYMBOL BUSINESS, NOTHING
CHANGES.
>> Woodruff: AND YOU ALSO WRITE,
ROBERT KHAYAT, ABOUT WHAT YOU
LEARNED ABOUT HUMAN NATURE FROM
THIS.
YOU SAID PEOPLE SAY THEY'RE FOR
PROGRESS BUT...
>> THAT'S RIGHT, THAT'S RIGHT.
I DEVELOPED THIS LITTLE SAYING
THAT MOST EVERYBODY WANTS
PROGRESS, BUT HARDLY ANYBODY
WANTS CHANGE.
BECAUSE CHANGE IS ALWAYS A
LITTLE TRAUMATIC.
>> Woodruff: DO YOU THINK THE
SOUTH HAS MOVED BEYOND WHERE IT
WAS?
>> OH, LORD, I MEAN, I WAS BORN
IN 1938.
AND FROM WHERE WE WERE IN 1938,
TO WHERE WE ARE NOW, IT'S JUST
TWO DIFFERENT WORLDS.
AND THE STATEMENT IS ALWAYS
MADE, BUT THERE'S MORE TO DO.
BUT OF COURSE THERE IS MORE TO
DO.
AS LONG AS WE'RE HUMAN BEINGS,
AND WE INTERACT WITH EACH OTHER,
THERE WILL BE MORE TO DO.
BUT INSOFAR AS OPENING DOORS,
TREATING PEOPLE WITH RESPECT,
MAKING PEOPLE FEEL WORTHY,
PROVIDING OPPORTUNITIES AT OLE
MISS, WHICH WAS SORT OF THE
EPICENTER, I GUESS, OF THAT
HIGHER EDUCATION FIGHT BACK IN
THE '60s, AT OLE MISS, NO
STUDENT, BECAUSE OF RACE OR
RELIGION OR GENDER, ANY OF THAT,
CAN FEEL ANYTHING BUT WELCOME.
I MEAN, THERE ARE TIMES WHERE
THERE ARE CONFLICTS, BUT NOTHING
RESEMBLES THE WAY IT WAS WHEN
JAMES MEREDITH CAME TO OLE MISS
IN 1962.
>> Woodruff: ROBERT KHAYAT, IS
THE AUTHOR OF THE BOOK,
"EDUCATION OF A LIFETIME."
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: NOW, TO INDIA,
WHERE MEDICAL ADVANCEMENTS ARE
CHANGING THE WAY SOME RURAL POOR
SEE THE WORLD.
JOHN IRVINE OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS HAS OUR REPORT.
>>> AFTER YEARS OF DARKNESS,
THEY HAVE JUST SEEN THE LIGHT,
AND THEY ARE THANKING THE
AMERICAN DOCTOR WHO BROUGHT THEM
THE GIFT OF SIGHT.
>> THE SUNGLASSES ARE TO EASE
THE TRANSITION OUT OF BLACKNESS.
SHE IS SAYING THAT SUDDENLY SHE
CAN SEE PROPERLY AND SHE IS SO
HAPPY.
>> HE IS A DOCTOR, CHANGING
LIVES OVERNIGHT.
JEFF FOUNDED THE HEM LAYION
CATARACT PROJECT THAT SENDS HIM
TO AFRICA AND ASIA TO CARRY OUT
A SIMPLE BUT TRANSFORMATIONAL
EYE OPERATION.
THE CURSE OF CATARACTS IS A
BLIGHT ON MILLIONS OF THE
WORLD'S POOREST, AND NO ONE MORE
SO THAN IN RURAL INDIA, PLACES
LIKE HERE.
FOR PEOPLE NOT USED TO ANY KIND
OF MEDICAL ATTENTION, THE
CURRENT TYPE OF SURGERY IS
NERVE-WRACKING.
ANYWAY ARE ON ANE
THAT RECREATES EYESIGHT IN THE
FIVE MINUTES IT TAKES JEFF TO
REMOVE THE CATARACT AND IMPLANT
A NEW LENS.
>> SHE IS TOTALLY -- SHE IS
BLIND?
>> SHE WOULD NOT SEE THE MOTION
AN INCH IN FRONT OF HER FACE.
>> A SERIES OF BREAKTHROUGHS
OVER THE YEARS HAS MADE THIS
PROCEDURE POSSIBLE.
THE LENS ITSELF IS AN UNLIKELY
PRODUCT OF THE SECOND WORLD WAR.
A BRITISH OPHTHALMOLOGIST MADE
AN IMPORTANT DISCOVERY WHILE
TREATING SPIT FIRE PILOT WHOSE
HAD PIECES OF GLASS LODGED IN
THEIR EYES AFTER THEIR COCKPIT
CANOPIES WERE SHATTERED.
HE DISCOVERED THAT THE FRAGMENTS
WERE ACCEPTED BY THE EYES IN THE
SENSE THAT THERE WAS NO
INFECTION, EVEN OVER TIME.
SO HE DEDUCED THE MATERIAL WAS
PERFECT FOR ARTIFICIAL LENSES N
SHORT, THESE PEOPLE ARE SEEING
AGAIN BY LOOKING THROUGH SPIT
FIRE GLASS.
>> IN THE SPACE OF THREE DAYS,
JEFF AND TWO OTHER SURGEONS
ENABLED MORE THAN A THOUSAND
PEOPLE TO SEE AGAIN.
REFLECTED IN THE LENS OF OUR
CAMERA, THESE PEOPLE SAW
SOMETHING THEY HAVEN'T SEEN FOR
YEARS.
THEMSELVES.
ALL TOLD, THE COST OF THEIR
SIGHT RESTORATION WAS ABOUT
15 POUNDS A HEAD.
THE RESULT IS PRICELESS
>> Sreenivasan: FOR THE RECORD,
15 POUNDS IS ROUGHLY $25 U.S.
DOLLARS.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY TONIGHT,
A REMINDER THAT IRAN WAS ONCE
THE CENTER OF THE REMARKABLY
SOPHISTICATED PERSIAN
CIVILIZATION, ONE THAT PRODUCED
SOME OF THE MOST ENDURING POETRY
IN THE WORLD.
JEFF BROWN TALKED RECENTLY WITH
THE MAN RESPONSIBLE FOR MAKING
MUCH OF THAT POETRY, WRITTEN IN
THE 14th CENTURY, ACCESSIBLE TO
WESTERN READERS.
>> Brown: "HOWEVER OLD,
INCAPABLE AND HEARTSICK I MAY
BE, THE MOMENT I RECALL YOUR
FACE, MY YOUTH'S RESTORED TO
ME."
THE FIRST LINES OF A NEW
COLLECTION TITLED "FACES OF
LOVE," OF THE WORK OF HAFEZ, THE
MEDIEVAL PERSIAN CONSIDERED ONE
OF HISTORY'S GREATEST LYRIC
POETS.
TRANSLATOR DICK DAVIS IS A
LEADING SCHOLAR OF PERSIAN
LITERATURE AND HIMSELF A POET.
"FACES OF LOVE" IS THE LATEST IN
AN EXTRAORDINARY UNDERTAKING BY
DAVIS OF TRANSLATING MANY OF THE
MASTERWORKS OF PERSIAN
CIVILIZATION, INCLUDING, MOST
RECENTLY, FERDOWSI'S "SHAHNAMEH:
THE PERSIAN BOOK OF KINGS."
AND WELCOME TO YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Brown: I WANT TO SET THE
SCENE A LITTLE BIT.
14th CENTURY PERSIA, IN THE CITY
OF SHERAZ, THAT YOU COMPARE IN
YOUR INTRODUCTION TO VENICE.
>> YES.
IT WAS A TRADING CITY.
IT WAS THE CENTER OF A VERY
FLOURISHING ARISTOCRATIC
CIVILIZATION.
BECAUSE IT WAS A TRADING CITY,
IT HAD A VERY WEALTHY UPPER
CLASS AS IT WERE, AND THIS UPPER
CLASS WAS ABLE TO PROVIDE THE
MONEY FOR A LOT OF ARTISTIC
PATRONAGE.
AND SO, THERE WERE A GREAT MANY
POETS IN SHIRAZ DURING THE 14th
CENTURY.
AND IN THE PREVIOUS CENTURY AS
WELL, THE 13th CENTURY.
>> Brown: AND THE GREATEST OF
THEM CAME TO BE HAFEZ.
NOW, TELL US ABOUT HIM.
WHO WAS HE?
WHAT DO WE KNOW?
>> HAFEZ WAS A POET WHO WAS AT
THE COURT WHICH RULED SHIRAZ AT
THE TIME.
HE'S A COURT POET.
HE'S A POET WHO... HE'S A BIT
LIKE BACH.
PEOPLE SAY THAT BACH SORT OF
GATHERED TOGETHER EVERYTHING
THAT HAD GONE BEFORE HIM IN
MUSIC AND BROUGHT IT INTO A NEW
KIND OF STAGE.
HAFEZ DID THE SAME WITH THE
CONVENTIONS OF LYRIC POETRY.
AND SO, THE LYRIC POEM IS SEEN
TO REACH ITS HIGHEST POINT IN
HAFEZ.
ONE OF THE GREAT THINGS IN
HAFEZ'S POETRY IS THAT IT'S
EXTREMELY AMBIGUOUS OFTEN AND
THAT IT CAN BE READ IN DIFFERENT
WAYS.
AND HIS POETRY CAN BE READ IN A
SECULAR WAY OR IN A RELIGIOUS
WAY, AND THIS HAS MEANT THAT HE
HAS BECOME SORT OF ALL THINGS TO
ALL PEOPLE THAT ARE INTERESTED
IN PERSIAN POETRY.
>> Brown: OF COURSE, THERE'S
LOVE, THERE'S ENJOYMENT OF LIFE,
THERE'S A LOT OF DRINKING-- THE
WINE FLOWS.
THERE'S MENTIONS OF THE HEART,
AND, OF COURSE, THERE'S SORROW
AND LOSS.
>> THERE'S A GREAT DEAL OF
SORROW AND LOSS.
TRUE, YES, TRUE.
AND THE WINE MAKES YOU FORGET
THE SORROW AND LOSS.
>> Brown: PEOPLE IN OUR AUDIENCE
WHO WOULD KNOW PERSIAN POETRY
THEY THINK OF MOST FAMOUS IS
RUMI, AND YET I UNDERSTAND THAT
HAFEZ IN IRAN ITSELF IS BY FAR
THE MOST FAMOUS IN POPULAR
CULTURE TODAY.
>> THAT'S TRUE.
>> Brown:  WHY IS THAT?
WHAT EXPLAINS HIS APPEAL TODAY?
>> HE SPEAKS TO ALMOST ALL THE
POSSIBILITY ONE'S EMOTIONAL AND
ALMOST INTELLECTUAL LIFE,
WHEREAS RUMI SPEAKS TO ONE SIDE
OF LIFE.
VERY EMPHATICALLY, VERY
STRONGLY, VERY PERSUASIVELY AND
HE HAS HIS OWN VERY STRONG
FOLLOWING.
BUT HAFEZ IS A MUCH MORE
UNIVERSAL POET THAN RUMI IS.
>> Brown: AND WHAT ROLE DOES HE
PLAY IN THE CONTEMPORARY?
THESE ARE LINES THAT ARE
MEMORIZED BY PEOPLE AND USED ALL
THE TIME?
>> OH, HE'S ABSOLUTELY CANONIC.
I MEAN, HE'S LIKE SHAKESPEARE
AND MILTON AND WORDSWORTH AND
TENNYSON ROLLED INTO ONE.
>> Brown: REALLY?
>> HE IS THE MAJOR GREAT POET,
AND ALMOST ANYBODY WHO HAS ANY
PRETENTIONS TO AN INTEREST IN
POETRY AT ALL-- WHICH IS MOST OF
THE POPULATION OF IRAN-- IT'S A
VERY POETRY LOVING CULTURE.
>> Brown: SEE, EXPLAIN THAT,
BECAUSE THAT IS NOT THE IRAN
THAT WE USUALLY TALK ABOUT ON A
PROGRAM LIKE THIS.
>> THAT IS TRUE,
I'M AWARE OF THAT.
DIFFERENT CULTURES PUT THEIR
ENERGIES INTO DIFFERENT ARTS AT
DIFFERENT TIMES.
IN THE MEDIEVAL PERIOD, FOR
EXAMPLE, YOU CAN THINK OF
PAINTING IN ITALY OR MUSIC IN
GERMANY, THAT KIND OF THING.
BUT IN THE MEDIEVAL PERIOD, THE
ARTISTIC ENERGIES OF IRAN WENT
LARGELY INTO POETRY, AND POETRY
HAS BECOME PART OF THE PERSIAN
CULTURAL IDENTITY IN A WAY THAT
IS TRUE OF VERY FEW OTHER
CULTURES.
EVEN ENGLISH CULTURE, WHICH
PRIDES ITSELF ON ITS POETRY SO
MUCH, POETRY IS NOT SO CENTRAL
TO THE IDENTITY AS IT IS TO
IRAN.
THERE ARE VERY FEW LITERATE
IRANIANS WHO CAN'T QUOTE OFF BY
HEART POEMS OR AT LEAST MANY
LINES OF HAFEZ.
>> Brown: I MENTIONED IN THE
INTRODUCTION THAT THIS IS ONE OF
A NUMBER THAT YOU'RE DOING.
IT SORT OF FEELS LIKE A MISSION
THAT YOU'RE ON.
IS THAT A RIGHT WAY TO DO IT,
AND, IF SO, WHAT IS IT THAT
YOU'RE TRYING TO CONVEY,
ESPECIALLY TO A WESTERN
AUDIENCE?
>> WELL, I WENT TO IRAN IN MY
TWENTIES.
I WENT FOR TWO YEARS, BUT I
ENDED UP SYINGTA FOR EIGHT YEARS
AND I MARRIED-- MY WIFE IS
IRANIAN-- WHILST I WAS THERE.
WE HAD TO LEAVE IRAN BECAUSE OF
THE ISLAMIC REVOLUTION, AND THE
PLACE WHERE I WAS TEACHING WAS
CLOSED DOWN AND SO FORTH.
WHEN I GOT BACK TO ENGLAND, I
REALIZED THAT I HAD HAD THIS
EXTRAORDINARY PRIVILEGE OF
GETTING TO KNOW TO SOME EXTENT
THIS CULTURE WHICH IS ALMOST
UNKNOWN IN THE WEST.
I HAD BEGUN TO LEARN PERSIAN
SERIOUSLY.
WHEN WE CAME BACK TO ENGLAND, I
DID A Ph.D. IN MEDIEVAL PERSIAN,
AND I THOUGHT THERE IS ALL THIS
MARVELOUS LITERATURE.
AND AS YOU SAID IN THE
BEGINNING, I'M A POET MYSELF,
AND THERE'S ALL THIS WONDERFUL
POETRY, MOST OF WHICH IS UNKNOWN
IN THE WEST, OR IF IT'S KNOWN
IT'S KNOWN IN VERY OBSCURE
SCHOLARLY TRANSLATIONS THAT VERY
FEW PEOPLE READ.
AND I THOUGHT, I HAVE THE
OPPORTUNITY TO BRING SOMETHING
OF THIS CULTURE WHICH I
ABSOLUTELY FELL IN LOVE WITH,
UTTERLY, I HAD THIS OPPORTUNITY
TO BRING IT OVER TO A WESTERN
AUDIENCE.
AND SO, THAT'S WHAT I'VE DONE
WITH THE PAST 30 YEARS OF MY
LIFE, REALLY, AND I'M VERY HAPPY
TO HAVE DONE IT.
IT'S BEEN A WONDERFUL ODYSSEY,
GOING FROM POET TO POET.
>> Brown: ALL RIGHT, WELL, THE
LATEST COLLECTION IS "FACES OF
LOVE."
DICK DAVIS, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU CAN WATCH
DICK DAVIS READ A SELECTION OF
HAFEZ AND OTHER PERSIAN POETS'
WORK ON OUR "ART BEAT" PAGE.
AGAIN, THE MAJOR DEVELOPMENTS
OF THE DAY.
THE STOCK MARKET SCORED NEW
GAINS TO FINISH A BIG YEAR.
THE DOW INDUSTRIALS WERE UP 26%
IN 2013 WHILE THE S&P 500 ROSE
29%, AND THE NASDAQ JUMPED 38%.
AND 2014 BEGAN ARRIVING AROUND
THE WORLD WITH HUGE FIREWORKS
DISPLAYS IN SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA,
AND THE PERSIAN GULF CITY OF
DUBAI.
ON THE NEWSHOUR ONLINE RIGHT
NOW, IF YOU COULD PUT TEN ITEMS
FROM 2013 INTO THE SMITHSONIAN,
WHAT WOULD THEY BE?
WE ASKED ONE OF THE MUSEUM'S TOP
CURATORS, AND HE GAVE US HIS
WISH LIST: FROM A SAME-SEX
MARRIAGE CERTIFICATE TO THE
"CURIOSITY" ROVER.
SEE HIS SUGGESTIONS AND TELL US
YOURS ON THE RUNDOWN.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
AND THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT.
ON WEDNESDAY, A LOOK AT NEW LAWS
LIKE RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA IN
COLORADO THAT TAKE EFFECT IN
2014.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND HAPPY
NEW YEAR.